Receiver 2 Critique: Misfire

I find Receiver 2 to be a fascinating deconstruction of the FPS genre, as guns
are highly lethal. Failing to perform adequate safety precautions can and will
result in negligent discharges. Of course, there's more to a shooter than
weapon handling, so let's see how Receiver 2 fares as a complete package.

The game's introduction is rough. While the tutorial introduces you to
mechanics like jumping and crouching, it fails to describe its systems in
sufficient detail. For example, you're left to figure out how player health
works, as there's no HUD element to tell you what's going on. This is fine for
enemy turrets, since it's easy to understand that a bullet will outright kill
you. However, negligent discharges and environmental damage are much more
difficult to figure out.

Let me describe these systems as as simply as I can. 1 enemy bullet will kill
you instantly regardless of its entry point. However, excluding the Desert
Eagle, you can take one negligent discharge from your own firearm before you
die. As for what actually causes a negligent discharge, it seems to be based on
RNG. The game claims that holding the holster button will reduce the chance of
a misfire due to having a slower animation, but there is no visual difference
between tapping and holding the key, so I'm not sure if the mechanic is bugged. 

Environmental damage inflicted by flying glass shards or from falling operates
off of a different ruleset. Depending on its velocity, environmental damage
will either outright kill you or make you temporarily limp for a few seconds.
If you don't sustain another injury while limping, your body will return to
normal status, where you can then take another instance of environmental
damage. Therefore, it's possible to chain together limps so long as they're
timed properly.

To get more information about your firearm, you need to scrounge through its
respective codex entry or squint at the contextual tooltips, but neither of
these are adequate substitutes for a proper tutorial. Maybe it's because I've
never touched a gun in real life, so concepts like racking back a pistol's
slide to inspect the chamber or manually decocking a revolver's hammer are
unfamiliar to me, but I shouldn't have to resort to looking up gun safety
videos online to figure this out. 

You have two categories of guns in Receiver 2: revolvers, and semi automatic
pistols. 

With revolvers, you'll either have a Colt Single Action Army Peacemaker or a
Colt Double Action Detective Special. The major difference between them is that
the Detective Special's double action trigger will automatically cock the 
hammer when you fire the gun. With the Peacemaker, you must manually cock the
hammer each time you want to fire a shot. Reloading is also extremely different
between the two. The Detective Special is fairly straightforward, as you need
to pull out the cylinder, dump out its rounds, and manually load in bullets.
The SAA is much trickier. You need to half cock the hammer, pull out a spent
round, and replace it with a fresh bullet. If you want to reload the entire
gun, you'll need to manually spin the cylinder and repeat this process for all
six rounds. 

Although it's much more cumbersome to use, I prefer the Peacemaker for one
reason: safety. Though the double action trigger makes the Detective Special
more convenient to use, you always need to worry about negligent discharges, as
it's easy to forget to manually uncock the hammer or to empty the cylinder
before you holster the gun. This isn't a problem for the SAA as it will never
fire unless you manually cock the hammer. Thus, I've never shot myself in the
leg with it, whereas the Detective Special has ended runs. 

Semi automatic pistols like the Colt M1911 or Beretta M9 utilize magazines
rather than cylinders. Each round must be individually loaded into said
magazines before they can be used in the gun.  Once the magazine has been
equipped, you need to manually chamber the round.  Additionally, most of these
firearms have safeties that must be toggled off to fire the gun. 

Like the Detective Special, I've got mixed feelings on this weapon category.
While semiautomatic pistols have have much larger ammo reserves and are more
convenient to use in a firefight, they require more preparation than a revolver
and are prone to negligent discharges, especially if you forget to unchamber your
rounds. Though there are many ways to safely carry around these weapons, I
found the most convenient option was to simply keep my rounds unchambered until
I found an enemy nearby. 

Overall, the guns are easily Receiver 2's greatest strength. Even though every
firearm you get is some variation of a pistol, the impressively detailed weapon
models and ballistics make them feel distinct from each other, albeit less so
with semi automatics. I like how you're forced to create mental checklists of
the maintenance you need to performance on your gun after every encounter, as
this deepens the physical relationship you have with your gun. This system
truly creates some hectic firefights as you need to constantly worry about your
firearm's condition while being shot at. 

However, this is where my praise of the game ends, as this exceptional firearm
handling is inserted into an otherwise mediocre game riddled with catastrophic
bugs and obscene repetition.  

What really lets down the gunplay for me are the uninteresting enemies. There
are a total of two types in this game: stationary turrets and drones. While
there are some mechanical differences between turret types, such as armored or
proximity stealth variants, their overall behaviors are identical. They'll emit
out a beam of light in front of them, as they scan from location to location.
To defeat them, you'll need to place a shot in one of their three weakpoints:
their ammo boxes to empty out their rounds, their turning gyro to disable
aiming, or their camera to make them effectively blind. Once you do any of
these three, you can safely hack the turret to permanently disable it. Now
repeat this process for the dozens of turrets you'll find in the game, since
you'll take down each one in the exact same way. 

Drones are a bit more interesting in that they're not immobile threats. They'll
actively move around in a fixed pattern with a wide detection radius. If you're
spotted, they will relentlessly chase after you and tase you to death. To
escape them, you'll need to juke around corners and rooms to stop them from
hunting you any further. While these pursuits are fun and are incredibly
tense, you'll never be on one unless you're reckless, as drones have obvious
visual and audio cues to their position and can be taken out with one body
shot.  

I would've liked to see an enemy type that actively kept me on my toes, one
that is constantly hunting me down and prevents me from being overly cautious
in sweeping through rooms. Because as it is, the game doesn't punish me for
keeping my gun unloaded before every firefight, since I know I'll never be
ambushed. This also would've made for an interesting PVP mode, as two alternate
reality players could hunt down each other.

For all intents and purposes, Receiver 2 has one level that you replay over and
over with some minor changes in lighting. It has procedural room arrangement to
keep things fresh, but this system has two major issues.  The chief problem is
that there simply aren't enough tilesets in the game, with there being a grand
total of 16 spanning all five missions. Furthermore, identical rooms are often
placed directly next to each other, heightening the sense of deja vu. Even
then, there's not much variety between the tiles themselves, as most of them
are variations of corridors littered with cover and chokepoints. As a result,
it becomes incredibly easy to break turret and drone line of sight, removing a
lot of the challenge from the game. There are some more open areas with
multiple levels of elevation,so you can snipe turrets from afar. However, due
to the inconsistent fall damage, you can't really exploit verticality to ambush
foes without becoming a sitting duck.

After an hour of play, I got sick of seeing the exact same apartment and
warehouse tiles being spammed over and over and over again. Given that Receiver
2's story involves multiple in-game realities, I don't see why the developers
couldn't have distorted the tilesets to get more effective reuse out of them.
Rooms could have their gravity inverted, forcing you to play on the ceiling.
Other tilesets could've be scaled up or down in size like in Alice in
Wonderland. 

Adding to sense of repetition, the objectives in each mission are exactly the
same, with you going on a blind scavenger hunt for easy-to-miss audio tapes.
It really doesn't help that these spawn in randomly, so there's no logical way
to deduce their location and seek them out. You just have to drunkenly stumble
around in darkly lit rooms praying that you actually find one. Enemy turrets do
have a decent chance of dropping a recording upon death, but it's not high
enough to reliably count on. As a result, depending on RNG, you can either
spend a few minutes or a whole hour in a single level.  

What drives this repetition to the point of frustration is the bassackwards
death system. When you die in Receiver 2, you become demoted, forcing you
replay the previous level before you can reattempt the current one. In theory,
this system heavily punishes you for being sloppy, forcing you to be methodical
in your approach. In reality, this just means that you end up having to repeat
several hours of progress in identical looking levels with identical looking
enemies hunting down RNG objectives because you made one mistake. 

I suspect this is an attempt to pad out the game's run time like in roguelikes,
as you could beat Receiver 2's campaign in an hour or two otherwise.  The thing
is, roguelikes generally have a lot of environmental, enemy, and item variety
that keeps new runs feeling fresh whenever you have to restart. It's also
possible to beat most of them in under half an hour if you're skilled enough.
Thus, they generally don't feel like a chore to play until you've sunk dozens
or hundreds of hours into them.  Receiver 2 has neither of these due to its
limited tilesets, poor enemy variety, and RNG objectives, so it gets very
tiring, very quickly.

To preserve your sanity, I'd just recommend save scumming throughout the
campaign, as if you quit the game before you die, you load back in a safe
position upon restarting the game. Given the exceedingly generous death window,
it's entirely possible, if not trivial to brute force the entire campaign by
save scumming.

Now let's talk about the elephant in the room: bugs. They're so egregious that
I legitimately could not beat Receiver 2 without using the debug console.
Examples include: Loaded magazines disappearing on me for no reason, leaving me
with no way to use my gun until I stumbled upon a new mag. Doing a stationary
jump or falling from any distance resulting in instant death, no matter the
height. The game resetting all of my current progress and forcing me to restart
the entire campaign. Perhaps your experience will differ than mine, but the
amount of game-breaking bugs and crashes I've encountered is shocking. 

Overall, Receiver 2 is a great experiment, and I love how it deconstucts an
otherwise stagnant genre while trying to promote real life gun safety.
However, I can't say that it's a good game, given its terrible level design,
frustrating design decisions, and plethora of destructive bugs. Hopefully
Wolfire games or another developer will build upon this concept and make a
truly exceptional shooter in the future. 

Thank you very much for watching. I want to thank Wolfire for giving me a
review key and for providing technical support. The Borderlands 3 video is
being worked on, especially now that I've finished slogging through my fourth
and final playthrough. And yeah, I'm going to eviscerate it.  After that, DOOM
Eternal. It's a phenomenal game, probably the best FPS that's come out in
several years, if not decades.  If you'd like to stay up to date on channel
news, you can join the Squidcord discord server or follow me on Twitter. If
you'd financially support this channel and can afford to do so in these tough
times, then you can make a pledge on my Patreon page. 

As always, 

Stay frosty.
